Rollback attacks and fast forward recovery (#150)
theupdateframework/specification: tuf-spec.md

  report the potential freeze attack.  On the next update cycle, begin at step
  [[#update-root]] and version N of the root metadata file.

11. **Fast-forward attack recovery** A _fast-forward attack_ happens
  when attackers arbitrarily increase the version numbers in any of the
  timestamp, snapshot, targets, or delegated targets metadata. The attacker's goal
  is to cause clients to refuse to update the metadata later because the attacker's
  listed metadata version number (possibly MAX_INT) is greater than the new valid
  version.  To recover from a fast-forward attacks after the repository has been
  compromised and recovered, certain metadata files need to be deleted as
  specified in this section. If a delegated targets file is subjected to a
  fast-forward attack, the snapshot role's keys should be replaced. Please see
  [the Mercury paper](https://ssl.engineering.nyu.edu/papers/kuppusamy-mercury-usenix-2017.pdf)
  for more details on fast-forward attacks.

    1. **Targets recovery** If a threshold of targets keys have been
    removed in the new trusted root metadata compared to the previous trusted

>     root metadata, delete the old top-level targets and snapshot metadata

Reviewer: Don't you also want to delete timestamp?

Author: As long as timestamp wasn't also subject to a fast forward attack, the timestamp shouldn't need to be deleted as the snapshot version number listed in timestamp remains valid. A new timestamp that signs the new snapshot will be released by the repository, and should be verified as usual.

Reviewer: Couldn't the attacker fast-forward the timestamp to INT_MAX, too?

Author: Yes, but that should be covered in 11.3. If the timestamp was the subject of a fast-forward attack, then the timestamp keys should also be replaced, triggering the recovery in 11.3.

>     files. Note that delegated targets are susceptible to fast forward attacks,

Reviewer: I have to admit these two sentences are not immediately clear to me. Would you please rephrase and clarify?

  report the potential freeze attack.  On the next update cycle, begin at step
  [[#update-root]] and version N of the root metadata file.

11. **Fast-forward attack recovery** A _fast-forward attack_ happens
  when attackers arbitrarily increase the version numbers in any of the
  timestamp, snapshot, targets, or delegated targets metadata. The attacker's goal
  is to cause clients to refuse to update the metadata later because the attacker's
  listed metadata version number (possibly MAX_INT) is greater than the new valid
  version.  To recover from a fast-forward attack after the repository has been
  compromised and recovered, certain metadata files need to be deleted as
  specified in this section. If a delegated targets file is subjected to a
  fast-forward attack, the snapshot role's keys should be replaced. Please see
  [the Mercury paper](https://ssl.engineering.nyu.edu/papers/kuppusamy-mercury-usenix-2017.pdf)
  for more details on fast-forward attacks.

    1. **Targets recovery** If a threshold of targets keys have been
    removed in the new trusted root metadata compared to the previous trusted
    root metadata, delete the old top-level targets and snapshot metadata

>     files. Note that this only applies to top-level targets metadata whose

Reviewer 2: "if targets is no longer correctly signed, delete local snapshot"

why? this makes no sense to me. If a repository wants a new snapshot won't it just publish one? If a repository wants to make sure old snapshot is not used even for rollback protection, it can rotate the snapshot keys

    keys are listed in root metadata.

    2. **Snapshot recovery** If a threshold of snapshot keys have
    been removed in the new trusted root metadata compared to the previous
    trusted root metadata, delete the old snapshot and timestamp metadata

>     files.

Reviewer 2: why is the timestamp deleted? If timestamp is compromised or repository wants the local timestamp to not be used for rollback checks, it can rotate the timestamp key

  report the potential freeze attack.  On the next update cycle, begin at step
  [[#update-root]] and version N of the root metadata file.

11. **Fast-forward attack recovery** A _fast-forward attack_ happens
  when attackers arbitrarily increase the version numbers in any of the
  timestamp, snapshot, targets, or delegated targets metadata. The attacker's goal
  is to cause clients to refuse to update the metadata later because the attacker's
  listed metadata version number (possibly MAX_INT) is greater than the new valid
  version.  To recover from a fast-forward attack after the repository has been
  compromised and recovered, certain metadata files need to be deleted as
  specified in this section. If a targets file is subjected to a
  fast-forward attack, the snapshot role's keys should be replaced. Please see
  [the Mercury paper](https://ssl.engineering.nyu.edu/papers/kuppusamy-mercury-usenix-2017.pdf)
  for more details on fast-forward attacks.

    1. **Snapshot recovery** If the trusted snapshot metadata cannot be
    validated using a threshold of snapshot keys from the new trusted root
    metadata, delete the trusted snapshot and timestamp metadata

>     files.

Reviewer 2: In fact, how would this heuristic even work in practice:
* client has a timestamp with snapshot version==1billion
* client starts a refresh, downloads root, then downloads new timestamp with snapshot version==1
* client sees a rollback attack, stops the update and never even downloads the snapshot that would include the heuristic that would make the valid timestamp now invalid

>     files.

Author: I agree that we should separate back out the timestamp vs snapshot recovery. Looking at it again, I actually don't think this check is in the right place in the workflow. I think the timestamp recovery should happen when the timestamp is downloaded, not as part of the root metadata workflow, and the same for snapshot. Especially as it is no longer tied to anything in the previous root metadata file.

It would be great to have separate documentation for the repository workflow. Right now all the advise for managing a fast forward attack (and a lot of other pieces) is buried here in the client workflow.

>     files.

Reviewer: Friends, but this is where and what we recommend in [the Mercury paper](https://www.usenix.org/conference/atc17/technical-sessions/presentation/kuppusamy). See "5.3 Recovering from a repository compromise" on page 7.

This is getting contentious enough (for good reasons) that I'm not sure that endless cycles of reviews and comments would do sufficient justice. A meeting hasn't solved the problem either. Perhaps it's time for the BDFL to step in and make a decision one way or another? @JustinCappos

  listed metadata version number (possibly MAX_INT) is greater than the new valid
  version.  To recover from a fast-forward attack after the repository has been
  compromised and recovered, certain metadata files need to be deleted as
  specified in this section. If a targets file is subjected to a
  fast-forward attack, the snapshot role's keys should be replaced. Please see
  [the Mercury paper](https://ssl.engineering.nyu.edu/papers/kuppusamy-mercury-usenix-2017.pdf)
  for more details on fast-forward attacks.

>     1. **Snapshot recovery** If the trusted snapshot metadata cannot be

Reviewer: @hosseinsia thoughts?

Reviewer 3: This is clever. I like it! So at least a combination of non-revoked keys should have signed the metadata?
And an attacker who uses the compromised keys to sign metadata won't succeed.

>     validating using a threshold of snapshot keys from the new trusted root

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    validated using a threshold of snapshot keys from the new trusted root
```

  in the trusted timestamp metadata.  If the versions do not match, discard the
  new snapshot metadata, abort the update cycle, and report the failure.

> 5. **Check for a rollback attack**. The version number of all targets metadata files in the

Reviewer: Nit: looks like line overflow

6. **Persist targets metadata**. The client MUST write the file to
  non-volatile storage as FILENAME.EXT (e.g. targets.json).

7. **Perform a preorder depth-first search for metadata about the

>   desired target.** Let TARGETS be the current metadata, beginning with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  desired target.** Let DELEGATOR refer to the current
```

  2. Otherwise, recursively search the list of delegations in
     order of appearance.

>     1. Let DELEGATOR be the current target role TARGETS and DELEGATEE denote

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    1. Let DELEGATEE denote
```

       metadata file MUST have been signed by a threshold of keys specified in the
       DELEGATOR metadata file.  If the new DELEGATEE metadata file is not signed
       as required, abort the update cycle, and report the failure.

    5. **Check for a freeze attack.** The latest known time
       should be lower than the expiration timestamp in the new DELEGATEE
       metadata file. If so, the new DELEGATEE file becomes the trusted DELEGATEE
       file. If the new DELEGATEE metadata file is expired, abort the update
       cycle, and report the potential freeze attack.

    6. If the current delegation is a multi-role delegation,
       recursively visit each role, and check that each has signed exactly the
       same non-custom metadata (i.e., length and hashes) about the target (or
       the lack of any such metadata). Otherwise, abort the update cycle, and
       report the failure.

    7. If the current delegation is a terminating delegation,
       then jump to step [[#fetch-target]].

    8. Otherwise, if the current delegation is a non-terminating
       delegation, continue processing the next delegation, if any, by repeating

>        the preorder depth-first search with DELEGATEE as the current TARGET role.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       the preorder depth-first search with the DELEGATEE as the DELEGATOR.
```

>        Stop the search, and jump to step [[#fetch-target]]. as soon as a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       Stop the search, and jump to step [[#fetch-target]] as soon as a
```

  2. Otherwise, recursively search the list of delegations in
     order of appearance.

>     1. Let DELEGATEE denote the current target role TARGETS is

Reviewer: Could we please say DELEGATOR instead of TARGETS? Can be conflated at first glance with the top-level targets role.

Author: This is using the same `TARGETS` defined at the beginning of step 7 (line 1475 in this version). I'll see if I can clarify this.

Reviewer: Sorry, just to be sparkling clear, I think we should start off by setting the DELEGATOR role to the top-level targets role, and go from there. Otherwise, it could confuse a few readers.

Author: better?

Reviewer: I think it could be clearer. Please see my latest suggestions?

Author: That makes sense. I think yours maps more closely to what the code would look like.

       (e.g., delegated_role.json).  Otherwise, the filename is of the form
       VERSION_NUMBER.FILENAME.EXT (e.g., 42.delegated_role.json), where
       VERSION_NUMBER is the version number of the DELEGATEE metadata file listed
       in the snapshot metadata file.  In either case, the client MUST write the
       file to non-volatile storage as FILENAME.EXT.

    4. **Check against snapshot metadata.** The hashes (if any), and
       version number of the new DELEGATEE metadata file MUST match the trusted
       snapshot metadata, if any.  This is done, in part, to prevent a mix-and-match
       attack by man-in-the-middle attackers. If the new DELEGATEE metadata file
       does not match, abort the update cycle, and report the failure.

    5. **Check for an arbitrary software attack.** The new DELEGATEE
       metadata file MUST have been signed by a threshold of keys specified in the
       DELEGATOR metadata file.  If the new DELEGATEE metadata file is not signed
       as required, abort the update cycle, and report the failure.

    6. **Check for a freeze attack.** The latest known time
       should be lower than the expiration timestamp in the new DELEGATEE

>        metadata file. If so, the new DELEGATEE file becomes the trusted DELEGATEE

Reviewer 4: We changed the way we describe a freeze attack check, could you make this consistent with the other checks in the spec?

"The expiration timestamp in new DELEGATEE metadata file MUST be higher than the fixed update start time."

  2. Otherwise, recursively search the list of delegations in
     order of appearance.

>     1. Abort the update cycle, and report the failure.

Reviewer 4: This doesn't look right? That step 1 is "Abort the update cycle"

Author: Oops, it looks like I should have removed this with the TAP 3 part.

    2. Let DELEGATEE denote
       the current target role DELEGATOR is delegating to.

    3. **Download the DELEGATEE targets metadata file**, up to either
       the number of bytes specified in the snapshot metadata file, or some Z
       number of bytes. The value for Z is set by the authors of the application
       using TUF. For example, Z may be tens of kilobytes. IF DELEGATEE cannot be
       found, end the search and report the target cannot be found.  If
       consistent snapshots are not used (see Section
       [[#consistent-snapshots]]), then the filename used
       to download the targets metadata file is of the fixed form FILENAME.EXT
       (e.g., delegated_role.json).  Otherwise, the filename is of the form
       VERSION_NUMBER.FILENAME.EXT (e.g., 42.delegated_role.json), where
       VERSION_NUMBER is the version number of the DELEGATEE metadata file listed
       in the snapshot metadata file.  In either case, the client MUST write the
       file to non-volatile storage as FILENAME.EXT.

    4. **Check against snapshot metadata.** The hashes (if any), and
       version number of the new DELEGATEE metadata file MUST match the trusted

>        snapshot metadata, if any.  This is done, in part, to prevent a mix-and-match

Reviewer 4: the "if any" has confused me, shouldn't we always have a trusted snapshot metadata at this point? as we download snapshot metadata before targets.

>     4. **Check against snapshot metadata.** The hashes (if any), and
>        version number of the new DELEGATEE metadata file MUST match the trusted
>        snapshot metadata, if any.  This is done, in part, to prevent a mix-and-match

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    4. **Check against snapshot metadata.** The hashes (if any), and
       version number (if any) of the new DELEGATEE metadata file MUST match the
       trusted snapshot metadata.  This is done, in part, to prevent a mix-and-match
```
Is this clearer?

Reviewer 4: For the top-level targets file we check snapshot hash (if any) in 5.6.2, then check targets is signed by a threshold of keys in 5.6.3, and then check snapshot version (if any) in 5.6.4. Is there a reason we do not do the same here?

Also, just noticed that [5.6](https://theupdateframework.github.io/specification/v1.0.20/#update-targets).4 does not indicate that the version is optional (hence my confusion above).

Author: Hmm, I actually think the ordering here is (possibly) wrong because you'd have to parse the metadata check the version before verifying the signatures. Either way I'll update to match the top-level targets order.
